Transcript of EyeWitness Video: Insect

these remarkable creatures inhabited the
earth more than a million years before
the dinosaurs today they exist in more
varieties than any other animal group on
the planet there are 200 million of them
for every one of us
they are insects most insects live above
ground but some live below it they have
adapted to every environment on earth
from scorching deserts to snowy mountain
slopes some insects even live underwater
from the tropics to the temperate zones
insects are everywhere yet because
they're so small they often go unnoticed
as they go about their busy lives
in their own unobtrusive way insects
completely dominate the planet their
conquered land water and the air and
became perhaps the most successful
animals in the history of the world
human reactions to insects are as varied
as the spectrum of insect life itself
some we like and admire and this is
reflected in expressions like busy as a
bee cheerful as a cricket
if we find others so monstrous and
repulsive that we cast them in horror
movies arpeggiating their reputation as
loathsome and despicable pests
on rare occasions insects have even
acquired a place in mythology to the
ancient Egyptians the scarab beetle
represented one of the most important
gods
when it rolled a ball of dung along the
ground it reminded them of their Sun God
rah rolled the Sun across the sky and
renewed life thus the scarab beetle
became sacred and was immortalized in
jewelry carved from precious stones but
what exactly is an insect although
various species of insect may look
completely different at first glance
they all have three things in common
first their bodies consist of three
distinct parts the head at one end the
abdomen at the other and the thorax in
the middle second there in vertebrates
they have no backbone
finally they all have six legs and most
have wings
these creepy creatures are often
mistakenly thought of as insects but
they have too many legs the wrong shaped
body and no wings
insects don't have internal skeletons
but most have a hard exoskeleton which
protects their inner organs much like
the panels which protect the inner
workings of certain man-made beetles
real beetles can't grow this big insects
never grow very large because that
exoskeletons would be too heavy to carry
their breathing systems limit size to a
network of branching tubes provides the
body with oxygen by drawing in air
through small holes called spiracles
without lungs for pumping air can't
travel very far so body length is
limited to about 15 centimeters
the world's smallest insect can fly
through the eye of a needle amazingly
this bulky Goliath beetle can also fly
in though it's one of the world's
largest insects
where did insects begin over 300 million
years ago the first winged insect swords
through the forests that covered the
earth fossils show that some ancient
dragonflies had wing spans of half a
meter
fossils also show that many early
insects looked a lot like modern-day
species indicating they evolved the most
successful life-form very long ago
insects had colonized the entire planet
by the time Homo sapiens evolved around
100,000 years ago this event provided
insects with a new opportunity many
found they could adapt to live very
comfortably alongside humans bedbugs
fleas and lice no doubt pestered are
itchy ancestors in their warm dark caves
other insects like cockroaches and flies
moved in to scavenge on leftover food
this made a rotten start to our
relationship with insects and ever since
we've seen them as no more than a
nuisance and a pest when in fact they're
an essential part of our lives without
insects it's likely we wouldn't have any
fruit because fruit grows on plants
which rely on insects to pollinate their
flowers
when flowering plants first appeared
about a hundred million years ago
insects quickly developed a taste for
nectar and pollen as the insect fed the
plants were pollinated and as the plants
flourished the insect thrive too in a
process known as coevolution but not all
insects are beneficial to plants as we
discovered when we began developing
plants as crops every year insects
destroy between ten and fifteen percent
of the world's food supply sometimes
leaving entire human populations
destitute and so the battle over limited
resources has led to an ongoing war
between humans and insects a war that we
sometimes seem to be losing
how can such small creatures compete so
successfully against us one reason is
that they reproduce in vast numbers a
fits for example reproduce asexually and
compare 50 genetically identical
offspring each week predators see to it
but not all of them survive
most insect Iver reproduced sexually
producing several generations of
genetically varied offspring each year
genetic variety improves the odds on
some individuals surviving and allows
successive generations to adapt to
environmental change in a process called
complete metamorphosis eggs hatch into
larvae which look nothing like their
winged parents the larva grows and molt
several times finally becoming a pupa
inside the pupa the body is completely
restructured and eventually a winged
adult emerges from the shell the ability
to adapt as the insect key to success
and perhaps the most profound adaptation
in the evolution of insects was the wing
flight is important as it allows insects
to cover large areas in search of food
and the mate it's also useful in
escaping predators
the earliest flying insects had two
pairs of independently flapping wings
later insects evolved ways to link their
four wings to produce two flight
surfaces that beat together some insects
have only one pair of wings which they
flap many hundreds of times per second
to stay aloft
flock of birds may be worshiped but
insects are more often despised as
depicted in the South American painting
of an insect demon attacking a longneck
bird in fact because insects are more
load than idolized they're the source of
superstition more often than the staff
of magical myth one superstition dating
back to 17th century England has it but
the sinister sound of a Deathwatch
beetle is an omen depending death
another harbinger of doom is the
death's-head hawkmoth which gets its
name from the pattern of the skull and
crossbones of the thorax in many
cultures butterflies and moths are
associated with death and both are seen
to represent the soul of the dead as it
leaves the body
although most insects are land loving
creatures the ability to fly took them
to new habitats like water dragonflies
and damselflies adapted to the watery
life and evolved one of the most curious
mating rituals in the insect world
having found his partner the male
literally gets attached and sweeps her
off her feet after mating
these damselflies stayed together to lay
their eggs either while on the wing or
while taking a more leisurely dip here
the happy couple submerged to place
their eggs up to 30 centimeters below
the surface of the water and they do
this very very good reason when the eggs
hatch the larvae or nymph can take
advantage of the abundant supply of a
pratik food without competing with its
parents while here the nymph shares its
home with other water dwelling insects
like this water beetle larvae which
breathes by sucking in air through tubes
in its tail the water boatmen stores air
under its wings as it hangs upside down
from the water surface this one is lying
and wait for a snack and this
unfortunate hover fly fits the bill
nicely
it's called under to become the water
boatman's next meal other insects have
adapted to live on the water's surface
rather than under it like the pond
skater which uses its front legs to send
signals in the form of ripples across
the pond whirligig beetles rely on
ripples tool as a way to avoid
collisions
wild pond skaters and whirligig beetles
live in the water on a permanent basis
the dragonfly larva is only a temporary
resident after two or three years of
feeding molting and growing the time has
come for it to leave it's underwater
nursery both dragonflies and damselflies
grow through a process we call
incomplete metamorphosis passing through
a series of stages in which the nymphs
become progressively more like the
adults very young limbs show no sign of
wings but with each molt wing buds
gradually developed and finally the
winged adult emerges
as blood is pumped into the wings they
expand and lengthen in just a few hours
after leaving the water the dragon is
ready to fly
dragonflies are hunters which rely on
the huge compound eyes to find pay each
eye has hundreds of facets each facet
has two lenses that take in light and
send signals along nerve fibers to the
brain
what do insects see we don't know
exactly how their brains interpret
visual signals but it's thought that
their compound eyes give a blurred image
by comparison with what we see we do
know that bees and other insects are
responsive to ultraviolet light giving
them a different perception of color
from our own
they probably see like this because of
the way flowers have evolved to attract
pollinating insects where we see this
insect see bright colors guiding them to
nectar we don't notice the pollen in the
flower but to insects it stands out like
an orange beetle it's also been
suggested that insects process visual
signals so quickly that our world seems
to be in slow motion to them
one thing's for certain insects see even
the slightest of movements that might
explain why it's often difficult to swat
a fly while we may not know exactly what
insects see we know precisely how they
sound ESOP the greek fable writer told
the tale of the idle crickets singing a
song while the industrious ants spent
the summer preparing food for the winter
ahead but the cricket may not have been
idle at all its call was either a
territorial warning or an attempt to
attract a mate the mole crickets
courtship song is one of the purest
sounds in the insect world it builds a
y-shaped burrow which fans out at the
end like a gramophone home amplifying
its message the tree cricket builds a
sound system from a leaf by vibrating
its wings against the edges of the hole
the leaf becomes a natural amplifier for
communicating a male bush cricket rubs
his wings together making an ultrasonic
buzz which attracts her mate she hears
this love song through ears on her knees
of all places and sends an encouraging
reply sound isn't the only way insects
communicate some use chemicals called
pheromones that's how a male moth finds
a date
his branched antennae covered in sensory
hairs can detect a female's perfume from
just a single molecule the male flies
upwind towards the greatest
concentration of scent which is being
released from the female's abdomen in
this way an indian moon moth can locate
a female from up to five kilometres away
tent caterpillars also use chemicals to
communicate leaving a scent trail to
signal a source of food to others of the
colony
army ants cross vast areas of
rainforests along special pathways the
sense which mark the route are laid down
by scouts to guide the colony from Camp
to camp these chemical highways also
show the direction to go to find food
which explains why you never get just
one of those industrious little ants on
a picnic having found a free meal they
quickly pass the message on and soon
everyone's arrived to join the party
ants which are no more than five
millimeters long can carry objects weigh
more than they do themselves but insects
use chemicals for more than just
communicating they've also adapted them
as defensive weapons these wood ants are
guarding their nest against invasion if
attacked they respond with a jet of
formic acid some birds know this and
intentionally put the ants in their
feathers where the acid acts like a
delouse er killing any other pests that
may have hitched an uninvited ride the
bombardier beetle carries an assortment
of chemicals for defense against even
the most threatening predator mixing
them the appropriate moment into an
explosion of hot clinic acid
not all insects do their fighting
chemically male stag beetles use their
menacing jaws to fight battles over
territory this little insect has yet
another means of defense using special
pads on its feet which stick to the leaf
the hemisphere rotor beetle protects its
soft body paths from the ants probing
jaws the beetles larva has a different
defensive technique camouflage it covers
its body in a straw like nest made from
its own dung some caterpillars disguise
themselves as bird droppings and others
match the plants they live on adult
moths and butterflies often perform a
similar trick markings on their wings
match the leaves exactly so predators
find it hard to tell where the dead leaf
ends and the butterfly begins also
expert at adapting to and hiding in
their environment are the stick insects
their bodies are sculptured into plant
like shapes perfect for hiding among the
twigs sticks and branches where they
live
the Redcoats were far from camouflaged
but they relied on an insect the
cochineal beetle to supply the scarlet
dial for the uniforms and that same dye
is used to color all sorts of food from
jelly and sweets to glass a Cheerios and
fizzy drinks even the icing on a
ladybird shaped cake whereas these
bright colors are inviting to our eyes
in the animal world they serve as a
warning not to touch or taste predators
know that red and black is often a sign
of poison yellow and black too sends a
clear hands-off message to potential
predators
and with the black and yellow stripes of
a hornet the message isn't lost on us
either but stinging insects aren't all
bad
according to folklore bee venom cured
Tsar Ivan the terrible's goat
bees provide the perfect example of the
paradoxical relationship insects have
with humans for despite the pain they
can inflict on us they also provide us
with one of our oldest pleasures honey
in some cultures honey is a symbol of
fruitfulness in love and marriage but
Hani was also mentioned as an instrument
of black magic in the records of a witch
trial Switzerland in 1499 bees produce
honey not for us but for themselves
because it's food to keep them going in
winter and to feed their grounds
young insects spent most of their time
feeding and the greediest appetites
belong to caterpillars the larvae of
butterflies and moths they even start
life by eating their own eggshells
different insects have adapted to have
mouth parts which suit their specific
needs caterpillars have scissor like
jaws for cutting through leaves they eat
deliciously adult butterflies and moths
have long tubular mouth parts specially
adapted for feeding on the sweet nectar
of flowers but they have a taste for
salt too and other minerals so they
sometimes drink from river water or any
damp objects they can find even the
sweat on human skin provides some of the
nutrients they need
flies are equipped with sponge-like
mouth parts they first secrete enzymes
which begin digesting their food before
they use their tongues to lap it up the
assassin bug uses a similar process with
a rigid and powerful piercing mouth part
it injects enzymes then sucks out the
contents like milkshake through a straw
the less than sanitary feeding habits of
some insects are responsible for the
spread of several human diseases
protective line has needle sharp mouth
parts which can pierce human flesh our
sucking blood they can transfer the
microorganisms which cause African
sleeping sickness blood sucking fleas
were the carriers of bubonic plague
spreading the disease as they hopped
from infected rats onto humans during
the 14th century the plague kilogram 1/4
the population of Europe is our
unshakeable fear of insects based on
their reputation as disease carriers
horror movie makers may have encouraged
our phobias but all things considered
insects are far more likely to destroy
plant life than human life for example
an army of leaf cutter ants working
together can destroy huge swathe of
rainforest in a matter of days they
carry the leaves back to their nest far
below the canopy under the rainforest
floor
in underground chambers the ants
cultivate a garden it may look like
chaos but there is a meticulous order to
what's going on here
the ants break the leaves into tiny
pieces creating a mulch with added
fertilizer from their droppings this
leaf litter nourishes the growth of a
fungus on which the ants feed Weaver
ants use leaves to build their nests
they pull the leaf edges together using
their bodies like staples gripping with
their jaws and holding tight with her
back feet then using their living larvae
like tubes of glue they stick the leaves
together ants wasps bees and termites
are all highly skilled architects some
mix mud and water to make clay and
others chew up wood fibers with saliva
to make paper both techniques familiar
to you
these are social insects whose colonies
have a great deal in common with human
societies
each individual has a specific job and
must cooperate in order for the
community to function properly
although we think humans built the first
skyscrapers termites were building them
long before we appeared
this two meter chimney ventilates a
sophisticated network of chambers and
tunnels below the ground which house up
to five million termites on a human
scale this would be equal to a
skyscraper nearly three kilometers high
how do they manage this fantastic
architectural feat through a strictly
organized society of specialists workers
do the construction and forage for food
while the larger soldiers stand guard
over and at the center of this frenzy of
activity is the most important member of
the society a queen
the only fertile female in the entire
colony of five million
she spent her whole life inside a
special chamber attended by drones
workers and soldiers and concentrates on
laying 30,000 eggs a day
all have their part to play in the
survival of the colony
yet again we've seen that prodigious
reproduction is one of the reasons
insects are so successful it also
explains how they can be such pests some
insects like the Colorado beetle consume
our potato crops diminishing the harvest
maize beetles and grain weevils infest
and feed on our stored foods and the
ubiquitous cockroach occupies our homes
contaminating all the detaches we
respond by creating deadly pesticides to
destroy them but the chemical formula
must be revised constantly to keep up
with insects which adapt over
generations to become resistant when
pesticides do work they kill the natural
predators along with the pests rice
farmers in Southeast Asia have found
that spraying kills destructive leaf
hoppers but also hits the beetles and
other insects which normally eat them
and when that happens any pest insects
left will have a population explosion
defeating the purpose of the pesticide
in the first place but the good that
insects do far outweighs whatever
problems they cause for insects are
among the world's recyclers converting
dead animals and plants into essential
nutrients which enable the Earth's soil
to support further plant life
insects are also indispensable as
pollinators these highly adaptable
creatures are essential to life the
world we know could not exist without
them
perhaps if we made more effort to
understand them we might adapt to give
them the respect they deserve


